Everyone benefits from employment equity,
diversity and inclusion because they
ensure that current and potential employees
have equal opportunity to be hired or
promoted for their skills and abilities.
They also enhance your organization and
your team as a whole, because a diverse
workforce can provide a broader range
of ideas and insights and greater resilience.
In this section you will learn to
recognize the scope of responsibilities
regarding employment equity, diversity,
inclusion and accommodation.
Ultimately, employment equity is
about removing barriers, and diversity,
equity and inclusion are about embracing
differences so that employees can perform
effectively and fully contribute to the organization.
This section should take you
approximately 20 minutes to complete.
It is your responsibility as a manager
to ensure an equal access to opportunities
that is free of discrimination.
It is also your responsibility to remove
barriers that prevent or hinder full
and equal participation in employment
in the core public administration.
Be sure to inform your employees
of their right to request work-related
accommodation to address needs and
limitations that impede their
ability to do their best work.
In offering accommodation,
there is no set formula.
While respecting the privacy
and dignity of employees,
handle each request on a case-by-case basis.
Accommodation can take many forms.
Some examples include
offering attendant services;
ensuring technology is accessible;
providing work-related information
in an accessible format;
offering flexible work arrangements;
providing a prayer room;
adapting the workspace;
adapting training programs to
the needs of employees.
Your organization has policies and
procedures that offer guidance in creating
a workplace that is more equitable,
diverse and inclusive and assistance
in removing barriers, to ensure that
all employees can participate equally
in the work environment.
Did you know?
Systemic racism in Canada is not new.
It dates back to 1536, if not earlier,
and still exists today.
Racism creates workplace barriers for
Black, Indigenous, and other
equity-seeking groups.
There is a spectrum of understanding of racism,
from deniers and skeptics, minimizers
and polarizers to those who see it
but don’t know what to do about it,
and those who see it
(perhaps because they are living it)
and are taking action.
Every employee has the right to a
workplace free of racism and discrimination.
There are recourse measures for those
who feel that their rights,
or the rights of others,
are being infringed upon.
There are those who deny that racism
exists and who actively work against
efforts to dismantle racism.
Given that the Employment Equity Act
is law and The Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms is part of the Constitution Act,
it is illegal to discriminate based on race.
In addition, the Canadian Human Rights Act
specifies all of the prohibited
grounds of discrimination.
Identifying, removing and preventing conditions
of disadvantage faced by racialized groups
and persons with disabilities is key
to ensuring an equitable environment where
individuals have equal access to
opportunities and services.
Everyone holds unconscious beliefs about
various social and identity groups,
which stem from our tendency
to organize social worlds into categories.
A bias is an attitude or belief, conscious
or unconscious, positive or negative, about
something in particular, including groups
of people, while an unconscious bias
is an attitude or belief we hold
but are unaware of.
The brain has learned to take shortcuts
based on our own personal experiences.
Although we may be unaware of it, the brain
makes generalizations, leading to stereotypes
of people based on characteristics such as age,
gender, ethnicity, religion and sexual orientation.
Biases, both conscious and unconscious,
affect our attitudes, behaviours and decisions.
Become familiar with your own unconscious biases
and how these may affect your behaviour
toward current and potential employees, whether
regarding staffing processes, accommodation
requests, performance evaluations
or other situations.
Remember, biases are learned and can be unlearned.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
Take a time out from the course to
familiarize yourself with your organization’s
policies and procedures, as well as the scope
of possible accommodations, to help you
address where barriers exist, and to help
build a more inclusive workplace.
You should also consider employment equity,
diversity and inclusion as part of your
HR planning, to support the organization’s
employment equity commitments.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select “Submit” when you are done.